---
starred: false
title: ''
datePublished: '2016-05-03T01:02:53.180Z'
dateModified: null
author: []
sourcePath: _posts/2016-05-03-7c3963d2-0600-4271-9809-defdb1e512cb.md
published: true
inFeed: true
hasPage: false
inNav: false
_type: MediaObject

---
# Sensory sub modalities in meditation

Sensory Experience in Meditation

What do people experience when they meditate?

There are various kinds of thoughts that people talk about:   
restless thoughts  
planning thoughts  
memories of past experiences  
painful thoughts  
imaginations of desired experiences  
repetitive thoughts

There is also:  
being absorbed or lost in thoughts  
a light cloud of thoughts

There are thoughts about thoughts:  
"I am having too many thoughts."  
"That thought over there is cheeky, it shouldn't be allowed in here."  
"I really shouldn't be thinking this . . ."  
"I must not be a good meditator, I am thinking so much"  
"I wish these thoughts would go away"  
"Grrrr . . . get out of my mind, damn thoughts!"  
Or: "Hey, that's a pretty interesting thought, maybe I'll sneak off and play with it for a bit."

How do I know that I am thinking?

think about it---how do you know?

do thoughts hit you?  
do they float through your mind like clouds?   
grab you by the throat?   
whisper or yell at you?   
appear on the screen of your mind?  
move up from your belly?

Thoughts can be experienced as sensory phenomena.   
Thoughts are always sensory phenomena.

for example --- thoughts as seeing

mental images: you can look at thoughts. When you see a thought, you can attend to it more closely by noticing:

---is it a still photo mental image or a moving picture series of images.  
---if it's a moving image, is it a repetitive tape loop or   
an ongoing epic? Is it moving slow motion or regular speed or fast?  
---what size is the image in your field of inner vision?  
---what is the point of view? where is the camera?  
what about the light source: is it sunlight (and is it from above, as in mid-day, or sunrise or sunset) or is it artificial light (from the side or above)?   
is there abstract imagery or graphics?  
has your mind constructed scenes or are you looking at photographic images?  
black and white or color?  
is the image fine grain, like a good photo or movie, or grainy,   
like television?  
is the focus clear, or is it fuzzy?  
perspective --- what's the angle of view? straight on, looking up from below, looking down from above.  
wide-angle lens, telephoto lens?  
what's the background imagery, the figure/ground relationship?  
are the surrounding things in clear focus?  
also, are they lit up or in shadow?  
size of screen --- square, rectangular, round?  
is there a frame around the image?  
distance of the screen from your mental eye  
three-dimensional or flat?  
wrap-around panavision or right in front of you or to the left/right 

Other kinds of internal seeing  
dancing particles, microscopic luminous somethings  
directions of movement and dimensions of vibration  
qualities of space, depth

the sense of hearing  
We can hear music, notes, melodies, voices, and faint sound effects that we barely notice, like the sound track to a movie or TV show.  
Sounds in our inner sensing can be stereo or mono or surround sound.  
Sounds can be loud or soft, far away or close to us, rhythmic or steady.  
Sounds can be distinct or faint, and change from one to the other in a split second.  
mental conversations  
is it a memory of a conversation or something constructed?  
tape loop of the same voice, same words or improv?  
tone of voice? pleading, commanding, blaming, criticizing,   
complaining, demanding, apologizing, questioning, praising.  
is the voice your own voice, an abstracted voice?  
directionality: is the voice coming from the left or right side,  
from the middle, or from below or above? does it move around?  
mono or stereo sound effects?

subtle sounds  
internal sounds, such as the vowel sounds, continue by themselves  
resonances permeating the body or   
focussing in one of the centers of the body or along the spine  
echo  
vibration  
harmonics of the sounds - rich chords  
sounds becoming faint, barely perceptible  
a feeling of being inside of the sounds or surrounded by a field  
of sound, or permeated by sound  
hearing the sounds of the silence  
energy sounds, hearing the energy in the air or flowing through  
the body  
silence as a musical phenomena

kinaesthesia (there are about thirty senses included in this one!)

touch  
skin sensing, hair follicle sensations, tingling, temperature,  
pressure  
touch in the membranes: the texture of air as it enters the  
nose, flows through the throat, fills the lungs and then   
empties, slightly warmer  
pulsing of the heartbeat - feeling it in the chest, throat, wrists

internal proprioceptive sensing  
muscle sensing - movement, tension, fatigue, relaxation, vibration,  
charge, trembling  
joint sensing --- the position of the limbs, the angle of the joints  
the arrangement of the body in space (this can be a feeling   
and also a seeing --- with the eyes closed, many people have an  
abstract image of the skeleton, a graphic showing where the  
arms and legs are)  
heaviness and lightness --- sinking into the Earth or levitating

vestibular sense  
balance --- in movement and in stillness  
the angle of the head when the body is straight  
intense sense of movement when the head is moved 1/10 of an inch

energy sensing or subtle touch  
feeling an "energy skin" extending out from the body three, five,  
ten, twenty, or even thirty feet  
energy currents running up or down the spine, up or down the  
front of the torso, the arms, the head, genitals, the feet.  
shifting the domain of perception from the physical body to the  
etheric body, which is experienced as charge, electric charge  
in space, sometimes in multidimensional space  
notice: is the energy flowing free or is it restricted? is there  
a sense of too much or too little energy in a particular spot?

midline torso sensations  
notice the variety of tinglings, excitements, clammy feelings,   
sinking feelings, and urges to move  
anywhere from the area between the legs to the upper chest  
along the middle, or midline, of the torso.  
sensations in this area get the special name: emotions  
an "emotion" is a label, generally an evaluative label, about  
midline torso sensations   
the line continues upward through the throat to the top of the head 

other things to notice:  
sequences of thoughts  
image --\>feeling  
or image --\>voice--\>image  
or sensation--\>image

Speed or velocity of thoughts, the rate at which thoughts come and go. Many times meditators complain, bitterly, about the speed of their thoughts, as if there is a rule that thoughts are supposed to slow down during meditation.

Notice transitional times: waking up, going to sleep, shifting between feeling tones and modes during meditation, shifting from thoughts back to the focus.   
As you pay attention to any sensory modality, it differentiates: if you taste coffee a lot, after awhile you can tell the different kinds apart. Some wine tasters can take a sip and tell you when and where the grapes were grown.

Anything you do a lot and pay attention to, your senses develop finer perceptions in that realm, and you tend to develop mental categories for 'types of' that phenomena. The brain actually devotes a larger area to processing input from those nerve endings, and this starts to happen within days. This leads to an enrichment of experience. There is a training effect in running, for example: the body grows hundreds of miles of new capillaries, and the entire cardiovascular system is strengthened. We don't really know how to talk about the training effects of meditation: the yogis talk about microscopic nerves made out of energy substance, which are upgraded, which vibrate at a higher frequency, are strengthened and purified by meditation.